A codon 19 mutation has additionally been described in H-Ras in a human pituitary carcinoma metastases. There are two recent reports of codon 117 mutations - the first in K-Ras in human colorectal tumours and the second in H-Ras, associated with activation of the RAS-MAPK pathway and the mental retardation Costello syndrome. It is interesting to note that Costello syndrome has been associated with increased cancer predisposition. There are no reports of K-Ras 164 mutations, and mutations at this codon were not identified by Sanger cancer genome project investigators.", "sentences": [], "annotations": [], "relations": []}, {"offset": 28248, "infons": {"section_type": "DISCUSS", "type": "paragraph"}, "text": "Recent clinical data convincingly associates response to anti-EGFR therapies with K-Ras mutation status in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer where, logically, response is preferentially observed in K-Ras wt tumours which retain the ability to respond to EGFR blockade. Our description of K-Ras gene amplification in a subset of wt tumours is of particular interest in this regard as increased K-Ras gene copy number may lead to a more active 'mutation'-like phenotype. Experiments to investigate this possibility are currently underway in our laboratory.", "sentences": [], "annotations": [], "relations": []}, {"offset": 28816, "infons": {"section_type": "DISCUSS", "type": "paragraph"}, "text": "It is interesting to note that our transcription profiling analysis revealed some similarities but many marked differences in gene expression following the introduction of the individual K-Ras mutants. We found that the codon 117 and the common codon 146 mutations cluster with the previously described activating mutations at codons 13 and 61, highlighting differences in individual mutation phenotypes. Our analysis of K-Ras induced gene expression identified a number of genes previously associated with K-Ras signalling, for example the MAPK dual specificity phosphatases DUSP4 and DUSP6. DUSPs are key regulators of the balance between kinase pathway activation and inactivation, and have previously been reported to be upregulated in an adaptive response, creating a negative feedback loop following MAPK pathway activation. Consistent with our own data, DUSP4 expression has previously been shown to be increased in pancreatic tumours with K-Ras mutations and DUSP6 expression increased in a variety of tumour types with mutations in Ras or Raf pathway genes. Of particular interest, however, was our observation that certain signalling cascades, including those mediated by Igf1 and Vegf, were differentially activated by cluster 1 and cluster 2 K-Ras mutants, suggesting that not only the presence but the specific molecular characteristics of individual K-Ras mutations may be important determinants of both tumour progression and treatment response. For example, recent data suggests that glucose deprivation can promote the acquisition of K-Ras mutations in human tumours and reports upregulation of the glucose transporter GLUT-1 in K-Ras mutant tumours. Our data confirms this hypothesis, but shows GLUT-1 induction restricted to the codon 12, 13, 61 and 117 mutations, with no change in GLUT-1 expression associated with the introduction of codon 19, 146 or 164 mutations, again reflecting phenotypic heterogeneity.", "sentences": [], "annotations": [], "relations": []}, {"offset": 30747, "infons": {"section_type": "DISCUSS", "type": "paragraph"}, "text": "Current clinical data is sufficiently compelling that K-Ras mutation testing to facilitate the selection of patients most likely to benefit from anti-EGFR therapy is increasingly recommended in clinical practise, and has resulted in a recent formal recommendation from the National Comprehensive Cancer Network that patients with K-Ras tumour mutations should not be treated with cetuximab or panitumumab. There is increasing interest in the identification of prognostic molecular markers, which may be used to select the most appropriate patients for adjuvant chemotherapy or to identify colorectal cancer patients at increased risk of disease progression. Although the clinical implications of non-hotspot K-Ras mutations requires further validation both as prognostic markers and therapeutic targets, our data suggests that future analysis of K-Ras mutations and quantitation of mutation burden in colorectal tumours should not be limited to previously described mutation hotspots and should additionally consider the unique molecular signatures associated with individual K-Ras mutations.