Plavina et al published a retrospective analysis of anti-JCV antibody levels in an attempt to further characterize the risk of PML in patients with positive JCV antibody status. They analyzed the samples of patients from AFFIRM, STRATIFY-1, STRATIFY-2, and postmarketing sources. They found a higher JCV antibody index value in pre-PML samples from natalizumab-treated patients who ultimately went on to develop PML (n=71) than in samples from anti-JCV antibody-positive patients who did not develop PML (n=5,834) (median of 2.4 vs 1.4, P<0.0001). Though this difference was maintained for patients with no prior immunosuppressant use, the index value distribution was similar for non-PML and PML patients with prior immunosuppressant use (median 1.6 in both groups, P=0.82). This group found that for anti-JCV antibody-positive patients with no prior immunosuppressant use and an anti-JCV antibody index <=0.9-1.5, the risk of PML was ~0.1 per 1,000 patients during the first 2 years of treatment. This value was felt to be similar to patients with JCV antibody-negative tests. For this low-index value group, the risk of PML was calculated in a range of 0.3-1.3 per 1,000 patients from months 25 to 48 and from months 49 to 72 of therapy. Patients with no prior immunosuppressant use and an index value of >1.5 were found to have the greatest measured PML risk, measured at ~1 per 1,000 patients during the first 2 years of treatment, and ranging from 8.1 to 8.5 per 1,000 patients from months 25 to 48 and from months 49 to 72 of treatment. The authors suggested that the index value be used to safely identify patients with positive antibody tests who have a low risk for PML.", "sentences": [], "annotations": [], "relations": []}, {"offset": 21650, "infons": {"section_type": "DISCUSS", "type": "paragraph"}, "text": "Subsequent analyses of this data have been performed and different estimations have been published regarding the risk of PML as it relates to JCV antibody titers. Borchardt and Berger issued their opinion that the prior risk estimates drastically underestimate the risk of PML. These authors utilized Kaplan-Meier curves and other techniques to estimate the risk of PML. They found the overall incidence of PML to be 1.3% during the first 24 months of natalizumab therapy and to be 6.8% at 48 months of therapy. They extrapolate that the risk of PML for months 25 to 48 in all patients on therapy is 5.51%. In a more detailed analysis, they report an estimated risk of PML in JCV antibody-positive patients without prior immunosuppressant use between months 25 and 48 to be 7.4% (compared with 5.3% reported by Biogen) and between months 49 and 72 to be 10.8% (compared with 6.1% reported by Biogen).", "sentences": [], "annotations": [], "relations": []}, {"offset": 22553, "infons": {"section_type": "DISCUSS", "type": "paragraph"}, "text": "Though JCV antibody testing has been useful in estimating the danger of PML in MS patients on natalizumab, there are clearly weaknesses with using this test alone. As such, investigators have sought additional methods to better predict PML risk. One such biomarker is a lymphocyte CAM, L-selectin (CD62L). Though its pathophysiologic role in MS is not fully understood, L-selectin is thought to mediate myelin damage in the CNS. L-Selectin is a CAM present on the surface of most circulating lymphocytes and is normally shed in the serum from the surface of lymphocytes after the initial tethering of the lymphocyte to the endothelium; however, shedding can also occur prematurely during cross-linking with certain monoclonal antibodies like natalizumab. This may explain mechanistically how activated lymphocytes are then unable to re-enter the peripheral lymph nodes or other sites of inflammation without the L-selectin molecule. L-Selectin is functionally active in the soluble form in the blood, and its levels are increased during acute or chronic inflammation. Basnyat et al examined a group of 99 subjects (44 RRMS patients treated with natalizumab, 30 RRMS patients treated with varying doses of IFN-beta, and 25 healthy controls) to study the levels of soluble L-selectin in the serum as measured by ELISA and the anti-JCV antibody index as measured by second-generation ELISA (STRATIFY JCV  DxSelect ). They found a significant correlation between the levels of soluble L-selectin and anti-JCV antibody indices in the sera of the natalizumab-treated patients (r=0.402, P=0.0007) but not in the other patients treated with IFN-beta. Levels of soluble L-selectin in the serum were significantly higher in the group of patients with high anti-JCV antibody index of >=1.5.