One of these patients was enrolled in SENTINEL and another was participating in an open-label safety study of natalizumab and IFN beta-1a after completing SENTINEL. A third PML patient was discovered after postmortem analysis of a natalizumab-treated patient with Crohn's disease who had mistakenly received a diagnosis of astrocytoma. Not only was the SENTINEL study suspended, but the drug was also temporarily removed from the market. A global risk-management program was then created to develop a risk stratification paradigm for PML.", "sentences": [], "annotations": [], "relations": []}, {"offset": 16026, "infons": {"section_type": "DISCUSS", "type": "paragraph"}, "text": "Initial investigation revealed three major risk factors for the development of PML, including a positive anti-JCV antibody (via a two-step enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay [ELISA] by STRATIFY JCV; Focus Diagnostics, Cypress, CA, USA), prior use of immunosuppressants, and increased duration of natalizumab treatment. Data from the Biogen Idec global safety database, from clinical studies (including AFFIRM, STRATIFY-1), and from the Tysabri Global Observational Program in Safety study (TYGRIS) were used initially to confirm these risk factors. Bloomgren et al examined this data and information from an independent Swedish registry of patients with MS to assess the PML risk. These authors found that among a total of 5,896 patients from AFFIRM, TYGRIS-U.S., and STRATIFY-1, the prevalence of anti-JCV antibodies was 54.9% (95% CI 53.7-56.2%). They noted that the prevalence of anti-JCV antibodies increased with age and was higher in men. The investigators identified 212 confirmed cases of PML among 99,571 patients treated with natalizumab, for an overall risk of 2.1 cases per 1,000 patients. Fifty-four of these patients had pre-PML diagnosis JCV antibody samples available for analysis. There were no significant demographic differences between the 54 PML patients analyzed and the rest of the studied cohort without PML. All of these 54 patients tested positive for anti-JCV antibodies. In this analysis, the greatest risk of PML was found to be in patients receiving >2 years of natalizumab therapy. However, data beyond 4 years of treatment were limited at the time of analysis. The investigators also discovered that 34.5% of natalizumab-treated patients with PML had been previously treated with one or more immunosuppressant (mitoxantrone, methotrexate, azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, and mycophenolate mofetil); as compared with 20.3% of all natalizumab-treated patients in the TYGRIS study. The duration of prior immunosuppressive therapy and the type of therapy varied widely in the PML patients. Of note, traditional MS therapies available at the time (IFN and glatiramer acetate) were not qualified as immunosuppressive based on the mechanism of action and do not seem to confer the same increased risk of PML.", "sentences": [], "annotations": [], "relations": []}, {"offset": 18261, "infons": {"section_type": "DISCUSS", "type": "paragraph"}, "text": "The incidence of PML among patients with positive anti-JCV antibodies in this cohort was 3.87 cases per 1,000 treated (95% CI 2.91-5.05). Patients were then stratified according to the presence or absence of the three identified risk factors. In the highest risk group (positive anti-JCV antibody test, duration of therapy 25-48 months, and prior immunosuppressant use), the estimated incidence of PML was 11.1 cases per 1,000 patients (95% CI 8.3-14.5). For patients with positive anti-JCV antibody tests with no prior immunosuppressant use, the estimated incidence of PML was 0.56 per 1,000 patients in those who received 1-24 months of natalizumab exposure and 4.6 per 1,000 patients in those with 25-48 months of natalizumab exposure. It was not possible to ascertain the incidence of PML among patients with a negative anti-JCV antibody test because in this data set there were no patients with PML who tested negative. By performing sensitivity analysis with one hypothetical PML patient with negative anti-JCV antibodies, the authors calculated a risk of <=0.09 cases per 1,000 patients (95% CI 0-0.48) in antibody-negative patients. Last, the investigators noted a low annual seroconversion rate from a negative to a positive anti-JCV antibody at ~2%.", "sentences": [], "annotations": [], "relations": []}, {"offset": 19534, "infons": {"section_type": "DISCUSS", "type": "paragraph"}, "text": "The STRATA MS study was a prospective, observational open-label study evaluating the long-term safety and efficacy of natalizumab over 240 weeks of therapy in 1,094 patients. This study calculated the cumulative incidence of PML to be as high as 12.8 per 1,000-natalizumab treated patients. Another large prospective study, STRATIFY-2, confirmed the rate of PML in anti-JCV antibody-negative patients to be 1 per 10,000 patients.