#P,.001
in comparison with Pros11/1mice, and P,. 0 5i nc o m -
parison with Pros11/EandPros1E/Emice.BLOOD, 5 NOVEMBER 2015 xVOLUME 126, NUMBER 19 VENOUS THROMBOEMBOLISM IN PROTEIN S-K196E MICE 2251monoclonal antibodies were made that recognize the PS-196E epitope,46
indicating that residue 196 is likely exposed on the PS surface.
Currently, the extent to which the PS-K196E mutation or PS
deﬁciency are risk factors for arterial occlusive diseases is not clear. To
explore the arterial occlusive ris k of these PS genetic variations, we
used a cerebral focal ischemia-reperfusion model. Because of some
limitations of the nylon-thread –induced ischemia/reperfusion MCA
occlusion brain injury methodology,46we employed the 3-VO tech-
niqueforrodent ischemic stroke.38,39This method consistsof temporary
occlusion of both common carotid ar teries in conjunction with perma-
nent unilateral occlusion of an MCA. The method does not use any
foreign materials to occlude the lu men of the vessels and consistently
produces focal ischemia, regional cerebral blood ﬂow that is .10% but
,20%, and adequate reperfusion in the cortex, achieving good repro-
ducibility for the homogeneous development of cortical infarction.39
When this method was used to evaluate the susceptibility of PS-K196E
mice and PS-KO mice to cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury, we
found that these PS-modi ﬁed mice did not show any increase in brain
infarct volume compared with wild-type control mice. PS protects
neurons from ischemic injury in mouse stroke models.47Therefore,
mice with decreased APC cofactor activity might have been expected to
show an aggravation of ischemic stroke, but it was not the case, indi-
cating that the PS-K196E mutation a nd heterozygosity for wild-type
PS do not compromise endogenous PS neuroprotective mechanisms.
Because the neuroprotective effects of PS are mediated through its
sex-hormone –binding globulin-like region,48we speculate that the
PS-K196E mutant with the intact sex-hormone –binding globulin-like
region retains its neuroprotective actions. Moreover, the neuroprotec-
tive effects of pharmacologic APC are based on APC ’s cell-signaling
actions, not on its anticoagulant actions, so loss of APC anticoagulant
cofactor activity might not compromise endogenous neuroprotection.49Five rare genetic race-speci ﬁc variants linked to VTE risk include
PS-K196E in Japanese, FV Leiden and prothrombin II ntG20210A in
whites, and R189W-protein C and del-Lys193-protein C in Chinese.11
Whether these mutations have been deleterious or advantageous
during evolution is unclear. Each mutation, whether a gain of
function or a loss of function, causes increased thrombin generation
that may prevent bleeding and achieve hemostasis or increase
thrombosis risk. Even today, as in ancient history, bleeding is the
leading cause of maternal death linked to childbirth in the absence
of modern medical care.50Thus, the PS-K196E, like the other 4
VTE-linked mutations, on balance may have bene ﬁted the Japanese
population historically by reducing maternal death, although it
increased VTE risk. If so, this PS-K196E Japanese mutation has
been advantageous since its ﬁrst occurrence after divergence of the
Japanese population from other populations and during its subse-
quent adaptive evolution.
In summary, the murine PS-K196E mutation similarly reduces its
APC anticoagulant cofactor activity in plasma and in puri ﬁed systems,
and PS-K196E mice and heterozygous PS de ﬁciency are more vulner-
able to venous thrombosis than wild-type mice, proving pathogenic
causality for the K196E mutation. Thus, PS-K196E mice may provide
a novel murine resource for studies of thrombosis in vivo that may assist
deﬁning race-dependent, PS-dependent pathophysiological mecha-
nisms for thrombosis in humans.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Dr Stephanie A. Smith and Dr James H. Morrissey
(University of Illinois) for providing the protocol for preparation of
HMW polyP.
This work was supported in part by grants-in-aid from the
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of Japan, the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science, the Mitsubishi Pharma Research
Foundation, the Japan Cardiovascular Research Foundation, the
Uehara Memorial Foundation, the National Institutes of Health,
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (HL31950 and 21544)
(J.H.G.), and the Takeda Scienti ﬁc Foundation.
Authorship
Contribution: F.B. designed research, performed most of the ex-
periments, analyzed and interpreted data, and wrote the paper; T.K.
performed the MCA ischemia-reperfusion model and analyzed data;
J.A.F. performed the recombinant mouse PS experiments and ana-
lyzed data; H.Y. established the MCA ischemia-reperfusion model
using the 3-vessel occlusion technique and interpreted data; Y.T.
analyzed data of the PE model experiments; K.K.