
60 Patients whose tumors con -
tained PIK3CA  mutations exhibited an improved PFS 
when treated with the combination of fulvestrant and alpelisib compared to fulvestrant monotherapy (11.1 vs 
3.7 months). There was no significant difference in PFS 
for patients who had WT PIK3CA . In the SANDPIPER 
phase 3 clinical trial, where patients were randomized to 
receive either fulvestrant monotherapy or fulvestrant plus 
the mutant PI3K-alpha, beta-sparing inhibitor taselisib, the addition of taselisib extended PFS by only 2 months compared with fulvestrant alone (7.4 vs 5.4 months) and was associated with more adverse events.
61 Importantly, 
there has not yet been a retrospective analysis of ESR1 mutations in these patient populations. Understanding whether these therapies can effectively target tumors with 
ESR1 mutations, or prevent the acquisition or subclonal 
evolution of these mutations, could provide alternative treatments for patients with ESR1 mutations.
AKT inhibitors may be another approach for tar -
geting patients with ESR1 mutations, since this pathway can be activated. A single-arm, phase 2 neoadjuvant clin -
ical trial was conducted using the AKT inhibitor MK-2206 in combination with anastrozole in advanced breast 
cancer patients with a PIK3CA  mutation.
62 There were 
no pathological complete responses (pCR) in the ER-
positive population, and there was no additional sup -
pression of tumor cell proliferation with the addition 
of MK-2206.62 Furthermore, a patient in this study ac -
quired an ESR1 mutation detected at the time of surgery. Although not statistically powered for analysis, this ob -
servation could suggest clinical resistance of ESR1 mu -
tations to AKT inhibitors. This is an important clinical 
question to be resolved. Another phase 2/3 clinical trial, IPATunity130 (NCT03337724), is investigating the use of the AKT inhibitor ipatasertib in combination with paclitaxel to determine whether patients with advanced 
or ER-positive MBC or TNBC who have a genomic al -
teration in PIK3CA , AKT1 , or PTEN will benefit from 
ATK inhibition. The LOTUS phase 2 clinical trial found that patients with TNBC treated with ipatasertib and 
paclitaxel had improved PFS compared with paclitaxel alone (6.2 vs 4.9 months),
63 providing the rationale for 
IPATunity130. It will be valuable to determine whether ER-positive breast cancer patients in this trial will also 
derive benefit from this combination. However, mTOR inhibitors currently remain the best option for treating 
ER-positive patients with activation of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway.
The combination of fulvestrant and everolimus has 
been tested in the PrE0102 (NCT01797120) clinical 
trial, where patients with ER-positive, AI-resistant MBC 
were treated with fulvestrant, with or without evero -
limus.
64 Patients treated with the combination showed 
a significant extension of PFS compared with fulves -
trant alone (10.3 vs 5.1 months). However, there are no projected differences in overall survival. These results 
demonstrate that targeting the PI3K pathway through PI3K- or mTOR-selective inhibitors may be clinically 
useful; however, further investigation is needed to deter -
mine whether patients with ESR1 mutations derive bene -
fit from these combinations.
Immunotherapy using checkpoint inhibitors is  
approved for many cancers, including melanoma, lung cancer, and bladder cancer. In recent years, antibodies to  
PD-L1, PD-1, or CTLA4 have been developed to target  
immune-suppressive pathways, allowing for cytotoxic  
T cells to infiltrate and kill tumor cells.
65,66 In breast 
cancer, immunotherapy clinical trials have been mainly focused on metastatic TNBC, a genomically unstable 
subtype of breast cancer that is believed to be the most 
immunogenic.
67,68 The multicenter I-SPY 2, phase 2 
clinical trial is evaluating novel neoadjuvant therapies 
and comparing immune therapy in combination with chemotherapy. In TNBC, there were higher pCR rates in 
patients treated with the combination of the anti–PD-1 
therapy pembrolizumab with paclitaxel compared with 
paclitaxel treatment alone (approximately 60% vs 20%).
69 
In ER-positive/HER2-negative breast cancers, there was also an increase in pCR in patients treated with the  
pembrolizumab-containing regimen (approximately 34% 
vs. 13%). Furthermore, in the phase 1 KEYNOTE-028 clinical trial, in which ER-positive breast cancer patients 
were treated with pembrolizumab monotherapy after pro-
gressing on several lines of therapies (median of 9 therapies before pembrolizumab treatment), 20% (5/25) attained 
a partial response and 52% (13/25) had stable disease. 
Pembrolizumab is currently being tested in combination 
with fulvestrant in MBC patients (NCT03393845) and 
 10970142, 2019, 21, Downloaded from https://acsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cncr.