 Collectively, these data 
demonstrate that ESR1 mutations mediate unique and 
allele-specific transcriptional programs that do not just 
mimic estrogen-regulated WT ER expression. A better 
mechanistic understanding of how mutant receptors 
drive unique gene expression in metastatic disease could 
provide insight into not only the subclonal evolution of 
ESR1 mutants, but may also identify novel strategies to 
target tumor progression.
Other studies have extended clinical findings of  
acquired ESR1 mutations in hormone-deprived MBC pati -
ents by confirming these observations in 2-dimensional  
culture systems. For instance, Martin et al23 were the 
first to model in vitro the natural acquisition of ESR1 
mutations in ER-positive breast cancer cells. Culturing 
breast cancer cells with WT ESR1 for the long term in 
hormone-depleted media resulted in gradual acquisition 
of the Y537C mutation in MCF-7 cells and the Y537S 
mutation in SUM44 cells. Interestingly, analysis of 
parental cells from each line demonstrated that a sub -
population of Y537S mutant cells preexisted in SUM44 cells at a very low frequency, and that this population 
was then enriched with long-term estrogen-deprived in 
vitro conditions. The Y537C mutation was not identi -
fied in the parental MCF-7 cells, suggesting that these mutations can either preexist or be acquired depending 
on the cell line background. Furthermore, tamoxifen- or 
fulvestrant-resistant long-term treated cell lines did not 
acquire ESR1 mutations, further supporting clinical ev -
idence that most tumors acquiring ESR1 mutations did 
so during estrogen withdrawal with AIs. Integrated tran -
scriptomic and cistromic analyses demonstrated that the 
cell line models with naturally occurring ESR1 mutations 
exhibited enriched chromatin binding, which correlated 
with enhanced estrogen-independent transcriptional  
activity. These results in long-term estrogen-deprived models are also confirmatory of studies that used 
CRISPR/Cas9 knock-in or lentiviral engineered ESR1 
mutation models.
20,23
Nongenomic functions of ESR1 mutations have 
also been described. Gelsomino et al14 have shown that 
insulin growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R) signaling was upregulated in ESR1 mutant overexpression models, and 
was involved in ET resistance to tamoxifen. Interestingly, 
this mechanism of resistance was cell-type specific and 
was dependent on the expression of the PI3K regulators, 
PI3K3R1  and PI3K3R3 , since small interfering RNA 
knockdown of these regulators restored tamoxifen sensi -
tivity. Treatment with specific inhibitors of the IGF-1R pathway also sensitized ESR1 mutant cells to tamoxifen. 
Furthermore, ER immunoprecipitation and proximity 
ligation assays demonstrated enhanced co-localization 
and crosstalk between mutant ER and IGF-1R.
4 More  
recently, Li et al24 confirmed a role for the IGF-1R path -
way using similar mutant models. RNA-Seq analyses showed an enhanced IGF gene signature in the mutant 
models compared with WT receptor expressing mod -
els. These cells exhibited an enhanced growth response 
to IGF1, which was common between the mutant mod -
els but also between tamoxifen-resistant and long-term  
estrogen-deprived models. Targeting the IGF-1R pathway 
through small interfering RNA knockdown or targeted 
inhibitors sensitized ESR1 mutant cells to ET, as demon -
strated in the study by Gelsomino et al.
14 Unfortunately, 
IGF-1R inhibitors have not yet proven clinically useful in MBC; therefore, they are currently not a viable targeted 
clinical approach for patients with ESR1 mutations. Other 
growth factor receptors, including the HER1-3 family 
members, need to be evaluated as potential mechanisms 
of ET resistance in ESR1 mutation models, since expres -
sion of different growth factor receptor family members have been shown to be enhanced in these models.
14,24
Martin et al23 performed rapid immunoprecipita -
tion with tandem mass spectrometry of endogenous pro -
teins to delineate ESR1 WT and mutant interactomes. 
These analyses demonstrated that many of the proteins 
bound by mutant ESR1 were also bound by WT ESR1 , 
but that there were increased interactions between  
mutant receptors and selected transcriptional regula -
tors, such as GREB1 and FOXA1. ChIP-Seq analyses also demonstrated a ligand-independent enrichment of 
FOXA1 motifs in ESR1 mutant cells. Targeted knock -
down of FOXA1 in WT and mutant cells resulted in 
a greater growth inhibition in ESR1 mutant cells com -
pared with WT, suggesting a role for FOXA1 in mutant- specific biology. In contrast, Jeselsohn et al
20 found that 
the FOXA1 motif was not enriched in hormone-deprived Y537S cells compared with estrogen-treated WT cells, 
and that knockdown of FOXA1 did affect growth of mu -
tant ESR1 cells compared with WT cells.