32345 by Consorci De Serveis Universitaris De Catalunya, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
﻿ESR1  Mutution/DMnuto eu tl
3723
Cancer   November 1, 2019may provide insight into the efficacy of immunotherapies 
in first- or second-line metastatic disease.
Because many patients with ER-positive MBC will 
be treated with a CDK4/6 inhibitor, it is important to 
understand how systemic inhibition of CDK4/6 alters 
immunotherapy responses. A recent study reported that 
CDK4/6 inhibitors enhanced PD-L1 expression on 
tumor cells and augmented responsiveness to PD-L1 im-
mune therapy.70 In a separate study, it was demonstrated 
that systemic CDK4/6 inhibition resulted in suppression of regulatory T cells, but had a lesser effect on CD8+ 
T cells, suggesting there may be an enhanced T cell– 
mediated antitumor response.
71 These preclinical data 
suggest that systemic CDK4/6 inhibition may upregulate PD-L1 expression on tumor cells and inhibit regulatory T cells, which may augment responses to immunother-
apy in patients after or during treatment with CDK4/6 
inhibitors. The Palbociclib After CDK Inhibitor and ET 
(PACE) phase 2 clinical trial (NCT03147287) is testing 
the efficacy of combining ET, CDK4/6 inhibition, and a 
PD-1 inhibitor in MBC patients who have progressed on 
ET. Furthermore, because ESR1 mutant cells have been 
shown to upregulate pathways involved in inflammatory 
response,
20 it is possible that tumors expressing ESR1 mu-
tations may be sensitive to immunotherapies. Analysis of ESR1 mutations in patients being treated in these clin-
ical trials should be performed to determine whether 
these therapies prevent the acquisition of ESR1 mutations 
during therapy.
PRECLINICAL STRATEGIES TO IDENTIFY 
ACTIONABLE TARGETS IN ESR1  MUTANT 
BREAST CANCERGenome-wide CRISPR knockout screens and tran -
scriptomic analyses identified several genes that are es -
sential for growth of ESR1 mutant tumors.
20 Potential 
candidates identified in these preclinical studies are classified as ER coregulators, kinases, and receptors in -
volved in growth factor signaling and downstream ER phosphorylation and epigenetic modifying proteins 
(Table 2).
14,18,20,21,24,57,72-75 Importantly, many of these 
proteins are targetable, and combinations of specific 
inhibitors and ET have either an additive or synergistic 
growth reduction in preclinical models.
The identification of mutant-selective coregula -
tors is one strategy to target mutant ER transcriptional 
activity. Gates et al18 performed mass spectrometry–
based proteomic profiling of WT, Y537S, and D538G protein complexes to identify coactivators for mutant ER. Pharmacological inhibition of the coactivator SRC-3 in combination with ET synergistically reduced 
ER transcriptional activity and growth of mutant ER-
expressing models. Furthermore, the SRC inhibitor 
SI-2 in combination with AZD9496 significantly in -
hibited growth of a Y537S ESR1 mutant PDX model in vivo, suggesting that the SRC family of coactivators may be useful therapeutic targets for blocking mutant 
ER growth.
In addition to targeting ER coregulators, several 
studies have shown that targeting kinases that phos -
phorylate mutant ER can augment growth inhibition by ET. CDK7 phosphorylates ER at S118 and is also re -
quired for cell cycle progression.
76 In a study reported 
by Harrod et al,21 the selective CDK7 inhibitor THZ1 
significantly reduced the growth of MCF-7 cells ex -
pressing the Y537S ESR1 mutation. The combination 
of THZ1 with fulvestrant resulted in further decreased 
growth, reduction of S118 phosphorylation, and reduc -
tion of ER-mediated gene expression. Jeselsohn et al20 
confirmed these findings, and also reported that the growth of MCF-7 ESR1 Y537S xenograft tumors were 
significantly reduced with fulvestrant in combination 
with THZ1. A study reported by Scott et al
73 reported 
that CDK2 can phosphorylate ER serine 294, which led to ligand-independent ER-mediated gene tran -
scription. ER S294 was also found to be hyper-phos -
phorylated in MCF-7 ESR1 Y537S and D538G cells compared with WT ESR1 cells. Treatment with the 
CDK2 inhibitor dinaciclib resulted in a reduction of S294 phosphorylation, and in combination with 
tamoxifen resulted in tumor regression in a MCF-7 
ESR1 Y537S xenograft model. These data demonstrate 
that inhibition of selective CDKs, such as CDK7 and 
CDK2, could potentially benefit patients with ESR1  
mutations and supports their clinical development of 
these alternative treatment approaches.TABLE 2.