
An additional consideration for the development 
of effective therapies to target ESR1 mutant tumors will 
be to target common acquired mechanisms of resistance 
between mutant and WT ER. The majority of patients 
with advanced or ER-positive MBC will be treated with 
a CDK4/6 or mTOR inhibitor in combination with ET during the course of their disease. Indeed, several studies 
now demonstrate differential mechanisms of acquired re -
sistance to either mTOR or CDK4/6 inhibitors in breast 
and other cancers, including upregulation of MAPK sig -
naling in everolimus- and palbociclib-resistant models, as well as mutations in RB1 , and upregulation of CDK2 , 
CCNE1 , or PDK1  in palbociclib-resistant cells.
80-86 
These aberrations associated with targeted therapy re -
sistance could be used to develop an effective treatment sequence to delay disease progression. Certainly, several 
recent and ongoing clinical trials testing investigational 
agents are recruiting patients who have been treated pre -
viously with mTOR or CDK4/6 inhibitors, and com -
parison of response between these patient populations is necessary to provide insight into whether certain patient 
populations benefit from sequencing of targeted thera -
pies or are inherently resistant to therapy.
Conclusions
Collectively, it has been demonstrated that ESR1 mu -
tations are frequently acquired during AI therapy in the metastatic setting and may play a role in metastatic 
 10970142, 2019, 21, Downloaded from https://acsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cncr.32345 by Consorci De Serveis Universitaris De Catalunya, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
﻿ESR1  Mutution/DMnuto eu tl
3725
Cancer   November 1, 2019progression. Advances in DNA sequencing technol -
ogy have led to more sensitive detection of ESR1 mu -
tations in clinical samples, and there are now several 
studies applying sequencing and ddPCR methods to 
track ESR1 and other mutations during treatment and 
progression. Targeted DNA sequencing and ddPCR technologies have shown that ESR1 mutations can pre -
exist in approximately 5% of primary tumors and are 
significantly enriched by 30% to 40% in the metastatic 
setting. Analysis of ctDNA allows for an easy, nonin -
vasive, and relatively inexpensive method to monitor driver mutations that may arise during treatment, 
which may eventually be used to guide treatment deci -
sions. Importantly, monitoring ESR1 mutations alone 
has not been clinically predictive of treatment; how -
ever, monitoring the acquisition of truncal or other mutations may predict response and/or progression of 
treated cancers. Currently, patients who have tumors expressing ESR1 mutations are best treated with the 
combination of fulvestrant and palbociclib, since this 
combination has significantly improved PFS in pa -
tients with the majority of identified ESR1 mutations. Ongoing clinical trials using fulvestrant with PI3K-
alpha specific inhibitors are showing promising clini -
cal results, but the analysis of whether patients with 
specific ESR1 mutations will benefit from this treat -
ment have yet to be published. Furthermore, immu -
notherapies are becoming increasingly more effective 
in solid tumors, and it is hoped that ongoing clinical 
trials may show clinical benefit in selected ER-positive 
MBC patients. Preclinical studies have identified novel targets that may be clinically important for targeting in 
these patients. Further discovery and development of 
targeted inhibitors is needed, and ongoing and future 
clinical trials are necessary to discover new treatment 
options for patients with MBC.Figure 2.  Targetable pathways in ESR1  mutant cells identified in preclinical studies. Growth factor receptor (GFR) signaling 
through insulinlike growth factor 1R activates the PI3K pathway, which is inhibited with GFR inhibitors or PI3K inhibitors. Cyclin-
dependent kinases 2 and 7 phosphorylate and activate estrogen receptor (ER). NOTCH, histone deacetylase, BET family proteins, ER coactivators, or ER itself are altered and implicated in resistance of ER mutant cancers. Immunotherapies targeting PD-1 are currently being investigated in breast cancer clinical trials. CDK, cyclin-dependent kinase; CoA, coactivator; EnR, endoplasmic reticulum; GFRs, growth factor receptors; HDAC, histone deacetylase; IGF, insulinlike growth factor; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; TCR, T cell receptor.
 10970142, 2019, 21, Downloaded from https://acsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cncr.32345 by Consorci De Serveis Universitaris De Catalunya, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2023].