 First, preclinical studies 
rely on the generation of ESR1 mutation models through 
genetic manipulation using CRISPR/Cas9 or through 
overexpression systems, thus any results must be validated 
in patient-derived material. Patient-derived xenografts 
(PDX) can preserve clonal representation and are becom -
ing a useful tool to study ESR1 mutations and test new 
therapeutic strategies.
47 Indeed, several studies have shown 
treatment responses in PDX models in in vivo transplant experiments or ex vivo organoid culture strongly correlated 
to treatment responses seen in patients.
48-50 Unfortunately, 
there is a paucity of ER-positive PDX models from MBC 
patients, especially patients with ESR1 mutations. There is 
an urgent need to establish more mutation-positive PDX 
models from metastatic patients.
It is hoped that the development of novel oral and 
more potent SERDs will provide a more effective ET 
backbone to target WT and mutant ERs. Preclinical 
studies have shown the effectiveness of the newer SERDs AZD9496, GDC-0810, and elacestrant (RAD1901) in reducing tumor growth of ESR1 WT and mutant  
tumors.
51-54 AZD9496 exhibited higher activity against 
ESR1 mutant cells than fulvestrant, as demonstrated through transcriptional and growth assays and in xe -
nograft growth models. However, the short half-life of AZD9496 and reduced efficacy of GDC0810 are sig -
nificant limitations for clinical development of these agents. Elacestrant is an orally available selective estro -
gen receptor degrader currently in phase 3 clinical trial to compare its efficacy and safety with standard of care 
ET (EMERALD trial; NCT03778931). Patients in this 
study who have WT or mutant ESR1 and have pro -
gressed on up to 2 lines of ET with a CDK4/6 inhibitor were randomized to either elacestrant or standard of care 
ET (fulvestrant, anastrozole, letrozole, or exemestane). 
Preclinical studies demonstrated elacestrant inhibited 
both WT and mutant ESR1 signaling and reduced the 
growth of mutant ESR1- bearing PDX models. If clinical 
studies demonstrate significant efficacy in the elacestrant arm, it would be one of the first clinically approved oral 
SERDs that may also be useful for patients with ESR1 
mutations.
Proteolysis targeting chimeras (PROTACs) are being 
developed to degrade the ER and may prove useful in 
patients who have ER-positive breast cancer.
55 PROTAC 
molecules contain an ER ligand covalently linked to an 
E3 ligase, which promotes proteasomal degradation of 
ER. Preclinical studies showed that the ER PROTAC 
ARV-471 promoted potent degradation of ER in mul -
tiple ER-positive cell line models.56 Furthermore, ARV-
471 showed robust growth inhibition of WT and mutant ESR1 xenograft models. Clinical development of ARV-
471 is ongoing and, if successful, will represent a novel 
class of ER protein degraders that can also be applied to 
targeting other proteins in breast and other cancers.
The development of additional targeted therapies 
for vulnerable pathways in breast cancer is needed to 
prolong progression and survival of patients with met -
astatic disease. Clinical trials using pan-PI3K inhibitors 
and isoform-specific inhibitors have been recently devel -
oped. A phase 1 trial in ER-positive MBC patients using the pan-PI3K inhibitor buparlisib in combination with 
fulvestrant showed that 2 patients with ESR1 mutations 
derived clinic benefit.
57 Larger studies using fulvestrant 
with buparlisib, such as BELLE-2 and BELLE-3, are cur -
rently being evaluated. The BELLE-2 clinical trial was a phase 3 trial in which patients who had ER-positive breast 
cancer and progressed on AI therapy received either ful -
vestrant or fulvestrant plus buparlisib.
58 The BELLE-3 
 10970142, 2019, 21, Downloaded from https://acsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cncr.32345 by Consorci De Serveis Universitaris De Catalunya, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Review Article
3722
Cancer   November 1, 2019trial evaluated the efficacy of these therapies in patients 
who progressed after being treated with an mTOR in -
hibitor.59 Although combinations exhibited a marginally  
better PFS (BELLE-2, 6.9 vs 5.0 months; BELLE-3, 
3.9 vs 1.8 months) the toxicity profile of buparlisib plus fulvestrant does not support its further development in 
this setting. However, the use of isoform-specific PI3K 
inhibitors are showing promising clinical benefit. In the phase 3 SOALR-1 clinical trial, patients with ER-positive MBC who progressed on AI therapy were randomized 
to fulvestrant with or without the mutant PI3K-alpha 
specific inhibitor alpelisib.