
39In the FERGI clinical trial, AI-resistant, locally  
advanced, or MBC patients were treated with fulvestrant 
alone or in combination with the pan-PI3K inhibitor pic-
tilisib.40 BEAMing Digital PCR assays were developed to 
detect 12 ESR1 mutations using ctDNA. Liquid biopsies 
were evaluated at progression on an AI, and ESR1 muta-
tions were found in 37% (57/153) of patient ctDNA.28 
The authors also compared ctDNA data with those found using tumor tissue from a subset of the patients. 
No ESR1 mutations were detected in primary tumor tis-
sue from biopsies collected at diagnosis (0/81). However,  
9.7% (3/31) of metastatic samples obtained before AI therapy contained ESR1 mutations, and the prevalence increased to 63% (12/19) in tumor samples collected after AI progression. In patients with both ctDNA and 
tumor tissues, the ctDNA often showed increased ESR1 
mutant content than match tumor tissue. This suggests 
that ctDNA might better reflect the total ESR1 mutation 
burden across multiple metastatic sites.
There was no significant difference in PFS between 
patients according to ESR1 mutation status in both the 
fulvestrant only or the combination fulvestrant plus  
pictilisib arms of FERGI. These findings support that 
patients derive benefit from fulvestrant treatment regard -
less of ESR1 mutation status when mutations are ana -
lyzed in aggregate. This is in contrast to the retrospective 
analysis of PALOMA-3,
5 where end of treatment ctDNA 
was used to demonstrate that the Y537S was significantly 
increased and associated with resistance to fulvestrant or 
fulvestrant plus palbociclib.
Collectively, these results demonstrate a need for the 
routine use of targeted sequencing of liquid biopsies, and if possible, tumor samples. These collective results show that ESR1 mutations represent a small subclonal popu -
lation in primary breast tumors that are most probably 
enriched during the course of treatment in the metastatic 
setting. Table 1 summarizes the frequencies of ESR1  
mutations found in clinical tumor biopsies. These fre -
quencies show that overall, the use of ctDNA may be a more reliable and representative detection of total ESR1 mutation status compared with genomic DNA from pri -
mary or metastatic tumors.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS  
AND THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES  
TO TREAT MBC WITH ESR1  MUTATIONS
There are effective ETs to treat patients with ER-positive 
metastatic disease. ET and biotherapy combinations  
are now commonly used to treat ET-resistant MBC, as 
opposed to sequencing of single endocrine agents. There 
 10970142, 2019, 21, Downloaded from https://acsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cncr.32345 by Consorci De Serveis Universitaris De Catalunya, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Review Article
3720
Cancer   November 1, 2019are 2 biological targets that have been approved for  
ER-positive breast cancer: mTOR and cyclin-dependent 
kinases (CDKs) 4/6. Treatment guidelines recommend 
that patients who develop MBC 12 months after adju -
vant ET or who are de novo metastatic should be treated in a first-line setting with an AI in combination with a 
CDK4/6 inhibitor.
45 This recommendation is based on 
the results of the PALOMA-2 trial, which showed that the combination of letrozole and palbociclib extended 
PFS by 13.1 months compared with letrozole alone (27.6 
vs 14.5 months).
46 However, other approaches, such as the 
selective estrogen receptor degrader fulvestrant alone or in combination with a CDK4/6 inhibitor, are also often 
used in a first-line metastatic setting. Subsequent ther -
apy of an AI- and/or CDK4/6 inhibitor–treated patient includes fulvestrant monotherapy (or in combination 
with a CDK4/6 inhibitor in treatment-naïve patients), a  
steroidal AI with or without an mTOR inhibitor, tamox -
ifen, or chemotherapy. Preclinical development and proof 
of clinical utility of additional targeted biotherapies are 
needed to delay the eventual progression to unresponsive metastatic disease. A better understanding of when to 
use targeted therapies and the sequence of combination 
therapies is critical to effectively manage ER-positive dis -
ease. Importantly, there has not been a direct comparison of the efficacy of fulvestrant monotherapy versus an AI 
with a CDK4/6 inhibitor. Furthermore, there has not 
been a direct comparison between the CDK4/6 inhibi -
tors palbociclib, ribociclib, and abemaciclib in clinical trials. These comparisons will help us understand effec -
tive sequencing of therapies to delay acquired resistance to targeted therapies and manage metastatic disease.