 These discor -
dant findings could be explained by different treatment 
conditions between the groups, different modeling of 
 10970142, 2019, 21, Downloaded from https://acsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cncr.32345 by Consorci De Serveis Universitaris De Catalunya, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
﻿ESR1  Mutution/DMnuto eu tl
3717
Cancer   November 1, 2019ESR1 mutations through CRISPR/Cas9 or overexpres -
sion systems, or divergent cellular backgrounds. Studies 
of the interactome of mutant ESR1 from clinical samples 
needs to be more thoroughly studied, as these may help 
resolve these discrepancies and potentially identify new 
approaches for targeting direct, mutant-specific tran -
scriptional regulators in ESR1 mutant samples.
Implications of ﻿ESR1  Mutations in Metastasis  
and Tumor Progression
There is considerable preclinical and clinical evidence demonstrating that metastatic tumor cells with ESR1 
mutations are most frequently acquired under the selec -
tive pressure of aromatase inhibitor (AI) therapy.
20,25 
These mutations are rare or are not present in primary tumors. ESR1 mutant cells may display an enhanced  
“aggressive phenotype,” which could provide an enrich -
ment of subclonal cell populations in circulating tumor cells and metastatic sites.
10,26
Gu et al25 were the first to report that the Y537S 
ESR1 mutation drives spontaneous ligand-independent distant metastasis in vivo using CRISPR-Cas9 engi -
neered ESR1 mutant xenograft models. Jeselsohn et al
20 
recently used doxycycline-inducible models of the Y537S and D538G ESR1 mutations to show that these cells  
express a transcriptional network that promotes metas -
tasis. ESR1 Y537S and D538G mutant cells both metas -
tasized, and withdrawal of doxycycline in the Y537S models resulted in regression of metastatic tumors, 
demonstrating that metastases resulted from mutant 
ER populations. Transcriptional profiling from this and 
other studies have shown that ESR1 mutations promote 
upregulation of hallmark cancer pathways, including  
estrogen response, the p53 pathway, and MTORC1 sig -
naling, suggesting a role for mutant ERs in promoting an 
ET-resistant and metastatic phenotype.
20,23
SENSITIVE DETECTION METHODS FOR ESR1  MUTATIONS IN CLINICAL BIOPSIES
It has been reasoned that the detection of ESR1 muta -
tions in clinical samples could provide important 
prognostic information over the treatment course of 
ER-positive metastatic disease. ER-positive breast 
cancer patients can recur many years after comple -
tion of adjuvant therapy. Zhang et al
13 were the first 
to identify an ESR1 mutation, Y537N, in a metastatic ER-positive tumor biopsy in 1997 using ER-specific 
exon primer polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and 
Sanger sequencing. Fifteen years after this seminal 
discovery, many laboratories have now confirmed the presence of ESR1 mutations in MBC biopsy samples 
using deep sequencing, and collectively these studies have identified a hotspot for ESR1 mutations within 
the LBD region using various DNA sequencing meth -
ods.
9,10,12,15,16,26-28 Early studies using next generation 
sequencing (NGS) as the detection method for ESR1  
mutations found that mutations were relatively rare in 
clinical samples. However, the development of droplet 
digital PCR (ddPCR) technology has allowed for more 
sensitive and reliable detection of these mutations. 
With current data, it is thought that the acquisition of 
ESR1 mutations are the most common mechanism of 
ET resistance in MBC. One of the challenges in breast 
cancer is the development of prognostic and predictive 
biomarkers for monitoring MBC patients. Next, we discuss the different sequencing approaches that have 
been developed recently using retrospective analysis of clinical trial samples to evaluate the emergence of ESR1  
mutations during tumor progression.
NGS DETECTION OF ESR1  MUTATIONS  
IN PATIENT BIOPSIES
Some of the early studies that analyzed ESR1 mutations 
from clinical samples used NGS platforms. NGS using 
Illumini Hiseq 2000 technology identified lower muta -
tion frequencies of 25% (9/36) and 11% (5/44) in 2 in -
dependent cohorts of MBC patient tumors.
15 Only 3% 
(6/183) of primary tumors contained ESR1 mutations, providing some of the first data that these mutations 
may emerge during metastasis. NGS of sequential tumor 
biopsies over time would allow for the identification of 
genomic alterations as potential mechanisms of tumor 
progression, but the burden of multiple biopsies on  
patients, and the cost and complexity of the assay over other techniques (eg, targeted ddPCR) limits its routine 
use as a standardized assay for patient management.