
Received 11 November 2003, accepted 1 April 2004Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis ,2: 1526–1532
/C2112004 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis1965 [14]. Since then, several other hereditary defects have been
identiﬁed as risk factors for venous thrombosis, such as proteinC deﬁciency, protein S deﬁciency, factor (F)V Leiden andprothrombin 20210A [15–18].
Rational guidelines for optimal treatment policies in families
with inherited thrombophilia are lacking due to few availablestudies of sufﬁcient size. Therefore, we started a large
multicenter prospective follow-up study to determine the
natural history of venous thrombosis in family members ofsymptomatic patients with at least one inherited prothromboticdefect. With these risk estimates guidelines may be inferred fortreatment and prevention of venous thrombosis in families withdifferent kinds of inherited thrombophilia. Other endpointssuch as arterial thrombotic disease (myocardial infarction [MI],stroke), death from various causes, major haemorrhage and
fetal loss were also studied. The European Prospective Cohort
on Thrombophilia (EPCOT) study combines data on individ-uals with familial thrombophilia over a large geographical areaof eight European nations and therefore is the largest cohort ofindividuals with inherited thrombophilia, thus providing reli-able risk estimates.
This paper will describe the data collected at study entry on
the occurence of venous thrombosis in the EPCOT participants
prior to entry, i.e. the baseline data on the history of venous
thrombosis.
Study design
Participants and methods
A total of nine centers (Barcelona, Bologna, Frankfurt,
Glasgow, Leiden, Malmo ¨, Paris, Shefﬁeld and Vienna) with
long-standing interest in thrombophilia research from eight
countries participated in the EPCOT-study. We includedpatients referred to these specialist clinics to create a largecohort of individuals with deﬁciencies in natural anticoagu-lants, which are rare, and to address the risk of venousthrombosis found in thrombophilic families compared withpatients with a similar thrombophilia defect without a familyhistory. Each center enrolled all registered probands (ﬁrst of a
family in whom thrombophilia was detected) with a deﬁciency
of antithrombin, protein C or protein S, or FV Leiden, whohad at least one relative with the same familial defect, and theirregistered relatives. Fewer individuals with FV Leiden wereincluded than would be expected based on the frequency of thismutation; however, the FV Leiden mutation was identiﬁedmore recently than the other defects of which carriers werecollected over the past 15 years. As controls, partners or, if
there were none, friends or acquaintances of the thrombophilic
participants were included. Controls were excluded if they wereknown to have heritable thrombophilia or if they were relatedto a participant with an inherited thrombotic defect. Therewere no exclusion criteria for individuals with inheritedthrombophilia: we included those who were symptomatic aswell as those who were asymptomatic, and those who receivedanticoagulant treatment as well as those who did not. Thestudy was approved by the Leiden University Hospital Medical
Ethics Committee, and all participants in this study gave theirinformed consent.
Data collection
Inclusion took place between March 1994 and September 1997with most of the participants (84% of controls and 88% ofthrombophilic individuals) included in 1994 and 1995. Infor-mation was collected at inclusion, and annually during theprospective follow-up by standardized data collection forms. Alldata were collected by the responsible physician or another
health professional at the participating centers by consulting
another physician, by medical chart review or by telephone ormail contact with the patient. Completed forms were sent to thecoordinating center with only the patient identiﬁers code toprotect patient conﬁdentiality. Data collected at study entryincluded information on general demographics, defect details(type, subtype, diagnostic methods, genetic conﬁrmation),personal history with regard to thrombosis (dates, location,
diagnostic test results), current medication (oral anticoagulants,
oral contraceptives, hormone replacement therapy or othermedication), other risk factors (e.g. obesity, varicose veins),obstetric history and family history of thrombosis. Datacollection was identical for controls and thrombophilic individ-uals, except for items on the type and subtype of thrombophilia.
All centres performed the various assays according to their
local protocol and participated in an external quality assess-
ment scheme for thrombophilia testing.