 As 134 thrombophilic individuals did receive short-term anticoagulation during risk situations, mainly duringpregnancy and surgery, this ﬁnding could be the result ofthe intention of doctors to treat those with a high risk ofvenous thrombosis only in deﬁnite high-risk situations.
The strongest point of this study is its size: deﬁciencies of
natural anticoagulants are rare, and large prospective studies
are therefore scarce. We excluded events that were not
objectively conﬁrmed; as these were few and equally distri-buted over thrombophilic individuals and controls (of theDVTs and PEs 12% were non-deﬁnite in the carrierscompared with 14% in the controls) this could not haveaffected our results. The results of this study should not begeneralized to all individuals with thrombophilia, as wefocused on asymptomatic subjects with familial thrombo-
philia, to which patient group these results apply. We have
shown previously that the risk of thrombosis is higher inselected individuals from families with a clear familialthrombophilia than in unselected individuals without a strong
family history, regardless of the defect [12,13]. Other studieson the risk of a ﬁrst venous thrombotic event in carriers of ahereditary defect [16–22] reported annual incidences of venousthrombosis ranging from 0.4% to 2.5% for protein Cdeﬁciency, 0.1% to 3.2% for protein S deﬁciency and 0.9%to 2.9% for antithrombin deﬁciency. For factor V Leiden, the
reported incidences ranged from 0.1% to 0.7% per year
[17,19,23–25]. The risks found in the present study could havebeen underestimated due to preventative measures taken bythe treating physicians, who were aware of the presence of athrombophilic defect, to reduce the risk of venous thrombosis.However, the risk for individuals with single defects mighthave been overestimated when they carried the prothrombinG20210A mutation, but were not tested for this particular
mutation in our study. We were able to gather information on
the presence of this mutation as an additional defect for 360 ofthe 575 thrombophilic individuals (63%).
Although the risk of a ﬁrst DVT or PE was increased in
thrombophilic individuals, the risk was still low and did notoutweigh the reported risk of 1–3% of hemorrhagic compli-cations in patients with prolonged anticoagulant therapy withtarget INRs with a lower limit of 2.0 [26,27]. Therefore, long-
term prophylactic anticoagulant treatment does not seem
beneﬁcial in asymptomatic relatives of symptomatic probandswith inherited thrombophilia, although future prophylactictreatment options with a lower risk of bleeding might changethis. However, there might be a need for a more stringentthromboprophylactic treatment policy during temporaryperiods of increased thrombotic risk as no DVT or PEoccurred in thrombophilic individuals during risk situations
in which prophylactic anticoagulation was used. In the
thrombophilic individuals, 42% of all DVTs or PEs occurredin the presence of a known risk situation and could thereforehave been prevented.
Whether screening or short-term prophylaxis would be
beneﬁcial is difﬁcult to conclude from our results, as the lowrisk of thrombosis might be the result of screening and a policyaimed at preventing thrombosis, as can be deduced from the
low number of women with estrogen-containing oral contra-
ceptives and the high number of women with prophylacticanticoagulant therapy during pregnancy or puerperium.Further studies should elucidate whether a more stringentpolicy of thromboprophylaxis in risk situations could furtherreduce the risk of thrombosis, which should in particular focuson individuals with antithrombin deﬁciency and combineddefects, who had the highest risk of thrombosis.
Addendum
F. R. Rosendaal originated and coordinated the study togetherwith F. E. Preston, E. Brie ¨t, I. D. Walker and J. Fontcuberta
(the study steering committee). The ﬁrst author, C. Y. Vossen,
performed the analyses and wrote the manuscript. All otherauthors were involved in designing the study and involved incollecting patient data and reviewing the manuscript.Familial thrombophilia and ﬁrst venous event 463
/C2112005 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis
 15387836, 2005, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1538-7836.2005.01197.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [25/08/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Acknowledgements
The study was supported by BIOMED II grant number
BMHI-CT94-1565 (coordinator F. R. Rosendaal). We thankE. Brie ¨t, I. de Jonge, L. Velmans, W. Noteboom (Leiden),
P. Bayliss (Sheﬃeld), M. J. Gallego (Barcelona), E. Aygo ¨ren-
Pu¨rsu¨n, M. Krause (Frankfurt am Main), C. Legnani
(Bologna), E. Berntorp, V.