 Studies includingdetailed, reliable information on risk factors could give insightin the risk of venous thrombosis associated with these riskfactors.
We have included over 1500 individuals with familial
thrombophilia from eight European countries, so our studyyields reliable and generalizable results. It should be noted,however, that in this study follow-up was counted only forthose entered in the cohort, i.e. individuals with any of thesedefects who died before the start of the study were notincluded. This implies that we may have underestimated therisk of thrombosis. However, in previous studies we have
shown that the mortality of antithrombin deﬁciency [30],
protein C deﬁciency [31] and FV leiden [32] does not exceedthe population risk. We also only counted objectivelyconﬁrmed manifestations of venous thrombosis to avoidselection bias, which means that we may have excludedinadequately diagnosed or missed events, and thus could haveunderestimated the risk. However, only a fraction of allreported events were not objectively conﬁrmed. We also did
not have full details on thromboprophylaxis prior to recruit-
ment. The incidence of VTEs may thus have been reduced inthe relatives if short-term thromboprophylaxis was used tocover surgery, trauma or pregnancy. After diagnosis of ahereditary thrombotic defect, thromboprophylaxis may bemore likely to be offered even to asymptomatic relatives andoral contraception with estrogen-containing preparations isdiscouraged at least in some countries. However, incidences
per defect were only slightly higher or remained similar to the
incidences shown in Table 3 when the year of diagnosis ofthrombophilia was taken as the study end-point instead of theage at which individuals were without venous events at studyentry. The risk of venous thrombosis might have beenoverestimated when mostly symptomatic relatives werereferred to a thrombosis clinic for investigation. In addition,the risk for individuals with single defects might have been
overestimated when they were carriers of the prothrombinG20210A mutation but could not be tested for this particular
mutation in our study.
It is important to note that our results concern individuals
from thrombophilic families registered at specialized clinics,and hence the results may be generalized to such individuals,but not to unselected individuals with the same defect, as wehave previously shown that these individuals have a lower risk
of thrombosis [11,12].
While more detailed data will result from the prospective
follow-up, this study showed that individuals with familialthrombophilia have an increased risk of venous thrombosiswith a high risk of spontaneous thrombosis and recurrencies.Since 70% of the individuals with thrombophilic defects werefree of thrombosis at age 60, it is unlikely that long-termanticoagulation started at a young age would have beneﬁts
outweighing the risks of this treatment especially in those with a
single genetic prothrombotic defect.
Contributors
F.R. Rosendaal designed and coordinated the study togetherwith F.E. Preston, I.D. Walker and J. Fontcuberta (the studysteering committee). The ﬁrst author, C.Y. Vossen, performedthe analyses and wrote the manuscript. All other authors wereinvolved in designing the study and involved in collectingpatient data and reviewing the manuscript.
Acknowledgments
The study was supported by BIOMED II grant number
BMHI-CT94-1565 (coordinator F.R. Rosendaal). We thankE. Brie ¨t, I. de Jonge, L. Velmans, W. Noteboom (Leiden),
E. Aygo ¨ren-Pu ¨rsu¨n, M. Krause (Frankfurt am Main), C.
Legnani (Bologna), E. Berntorp, V. Meha (Malmo ¨), P. Bayliss
(Sheﬃeld) and S. Koder (Vienna) for their contributions to the
study.
References
1 Nordstro ¨m M, Lindblad B, Bergqvist D, Kjellstro ¨m T. A prospective
study of the incidence of deep-vein thrombosis within a deﬁned urbanpopulation. JI n t e r nM e d 1992; 232: 155–60.
2 Anderson FA Jr, Brownell Wheeler H, Goldberg RJ, Hosmer DW,
Patwardhan NA, Jovanovic B, Forcier A, Dalen JE. A population-based perspective of the hospital in cidence and case-fatality rates of
deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism. The Worcester DVT
Study. Arch Intern Med 1991; 151: 933–8.
3 Lane DA, Mannucci PM, Bauer KA, Bertina RM, Bochkov NP,
Boulyjenkov V, Chandy M, Dahlba ¨ck B, Ginter EK, Miletich JP,
Rosendaal FR, Seligsohn U. Inh erited thrombophilia: Part 2. Thromb
Haemost 1996; 76: 824–34.
4B r a n d j e s D P , B u ¨ller HR, Heijboer H, Huisman MV, de Rijk M, Jagt
H, ten Cate JW. Randomised trial of eﬀect of compression stockings in
patients with symptomatic proximal-vein thrombosis. Lancet 1997;
349: 759–62.
5 Heit JA, Silverstein MD, Mohr DN, Petterson TM, O’Fallon WM,
Melton LJ III. Predictors of survival after deep vein thrombosis and
pulmonary embolism: a population-based, cohort study. Arch Intern
Med 1999; 159: 445–53.