 with regard to screening or (long-term) prophylacticanticoagulant treatment in families with inherited thrombo-philia is to deﬁne the absolute risk of venous thrombosis, andto weigh this risk against the risk of bleeding complicationsassociated with prophylactic treatment. To obtain valid riskestimates of the absolute risk of venous thrombosis in families
with inherited thrombophilia, we started the European Pros-
pective Cohort on Thrombophilia (EPCOT) study. TheEPCOT study, by combining data from nine centers, is thelargest prospective cohort of individuals with deﬁciencies ofprotein C, protein S and antithrombin and factor V Leiden. Inthis paper, we present data on the risk of a ﬁrst venousthromboembolic event associated with inherited thrombophiliain relatives of probands from thrombophilic families who were
asymptomatic at the time of inclusion in the study.
Methods
Participants
The design of the study has been described in detail previously
[14]. In short, inclusion of the participants took place betweenMarch 1994 and September 1997 with prospective follow-up
until January 2001. Nine centers from eight countries (Austria,
France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Sweden, the Netherlands andthe United Kingdom) participated. Each center enrolled allregistered probands (ﬁrst of a family in whom thrombophiliawas detected) with a deﬁciency of protein C, protein S orantithrombin or factor V Leiden, and their registered relativeswith one of these defects. Healthy partners or, if there werenone, friends or acquaintances of participating individuals with
inherited thrombophilia were included as controls. Controls
were excluded if they were known to have heritable thrombo-philia, or if they were related to a participant with an inheritedthrombotic defect. Controls were, however, not tested for anyof the defects under study after study entry. All participantsgave informed consent. Data were collected at baseline, andannually during follow-up. At study entry data were collectedon subjects’ general demographics, hereditary defect [type,
subtype (if available), levels (if available), information on DNA
testing], current medication and current risk factors forthrombosis, history of thrombosis, obstetric history and familyhistory of thrombosis. The data recorded at follow-up includedthe occurrence of risk situations [surgery, hospital admission,plaster casts, prolonged bed rest (> 2 weeks), traveling(> 8 h), details on pregnancies, medication)] and on outcomeevents (e.g. venous thrombosis, hemorrhage, death). Comple-
ted forms were sent to the coordinating center with only the
patient identiﬁer’s code to protect patient conﬁdentiality.
From a total of 1626 individuals with thrombophilic defects
and 1212 control subjects, this paper includes only relatives ofprobands who had not previously experienced any venousthrombotic event [deep venous thrombosis (DVT), pulmonaryembolism (PE), or superﬁcial thrombophlebitis (STP)] beforeinclusion in the study, and who did not receive long-termprophylactic oral anticoagulant treatment during prospective
follow-up (deﬁned as treatment for at least 1 year withoutinterruptions). Twenty thrombophilic individuals receivedlong-term prophylactic oral anticoagulant treatment: 10 forprevention of venous thrombosis and 10 for a personal historyof arterial disease. Eight controls received long-term anticoag-ulation treatment for an arterial indication. In addition, we
only included relatives of probands tested because of venous
thrombosis or a positive family history. Families in whichthrombophilia was detected because of screening beforehormone prescription or research purposes were not included,in an effort to stay as close as possible to the real-life situationof an individual from a symptomatic thrombophilia familyasking a physician for advice.
Recruitment was before description of the G20210A muta-
tion in the prothrombin gene, but during prospective follow-up
we gathered information on the presence of this mutation as anadditional defect.
Quality assessment thrombophilia testing and veriﬁcation
of events
The participating centers performed the various assays accord-
ing to their local protocol and participated in an externalquality assessment scheme for thrombophilia testing. For theﬁrst 2 years this was the quality assurance scheme developed forthe European Concerted Action on Thrombosis (ECAT/EQAS) (Leiden) and for the subsequent years the UK National
External Quality Assessment Service (NEQAS) (Shefﬁeld,
UK).
Per center, a local investigator veriﬁed all events in
prospective follow-up. In case of death the autopsy data werecollected, if available. An adjudication committee scored allreported events independently after receiving all the relevantmedical information from each center, but in case of doubt orwhen no consensus was reached at ﬁrst, further information
was asked for (e.g.