VIEWPOINT
VOICES OF CARDIOLOGY
Hidden Victims of the Pandemic
Sara Moscatelli, MD
Confusion is a word we have invented for an
order which is not understood.
—Henry Miller ( 1)
We heard of a fatal virus spreading in China
as though it were something happeningfar, far away. But it was also not the ﬁrst
time because more than 10 years ago our mass mediawere reporting the news of a virus with a high viralload. It was the time of the H1N1 in ﬂuenza, which
sounded scary but did not have a signi ﬁcant death
toll in European countries. On the wave of this pastexperience, when we ﬁrst read about severe acute res-
piratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 and coronavirusdisease-2019 (COVID-19), we were initially alertedbut then immediately went back to our everydayroutine. Our initial underestimation of the entire situ-ation made us delay our reaction to it slightly, and this
delay had the unfortunate outcomes that we all recog-
nize and have discussed over the past several months.
When acknowledging the thousands of victims of
COVID-19, it is important to look into the “under-
estimated ”aspects of COVID-19 and how they may
affect society.
COVID MANIA: MISINFORMATION AND
CONFUSION
Since December 2019, social media have been
increasingly posting comments and articles aboutCOVID-19, and massive confusion invaded the worldof information. It was not clear to health pro-f e s s i o n a l sl i k em eh o wo u ri m m e d i a t ef u t u r ew o u l d
look because on one hand, some scientists wereafﬁrming that COVID-19 would be only a severe ﬂu
affecting older adults, whereas on the other hand,different scientists insisted on the severity and mor-tality of this virus. Public opinion was divided, andwe did not know which side to take. Our information
on how contagious the virus is was entirely new, and
we had to move from the ﬁrst clinical cases reported
in China to the large trials that are now being pub-lished or to pharmacological treatments such asremdesivir, which recently received emergencyapproval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
Our social media accounts contained numerous
contradicting posts, articles, and interviews. For the
ﬁrst time, we were facing a global problem where the
world of social media was a double sided-weapon.Social media, which had revolutionized our lives byshortening distances, increasing the speed of infor-mation we receive, and creating resources for op-portunities, was now causing uncertainty when weneeded clarity. Many data are available, but their
validity is challenging to ascertain. Studies that were
advertised before they even started recruiting pa-
tients created confusion about their ef ﬁcacy.
Inside hospitals, it was not clear when COVID-19
should be suspected in patients, how to establish adeﬁnitive diagnosis, how to treat these patients, and
which types of personal protective equipment werebest and how to wear them. Contradicting pieces ofinformation were coming in every day from regional
authorities, and changes in the recommended paths
to follow were routinely increasing stress and fear.
Importantly, there is valid criticism of publishing
as related to COVID-19. The World Health Organiza-tion reported more than 5,000 publications onCOVID-19 by the end of March 2020. How many ofthese publications are meaningful, and how many ofthese just repeat the same information and fail to
provide new knowledge? Does this mean that a
physician will need to stay awake over social media orlarge journals to be informed about COVID-19, espe-cially when the quality of some governmental up-dates has been lower than expected? How worrying
ISSN 2666-0849 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2020.05.069From the Clinic of Cardiovascular Diseases, University of Genoa, Genoa,
Italy. The author has reported that she has no relationships relevant tothe contents of this paper to disclose.The author attests they are in compliance with human studies commit-tees and animal welfare regulations of the author ’s institutions and Food
and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent whereappropriate. For more information, visit the JACC: Case Reports author
instructions page .JACC: CASE REPORTS V O L .2 ,N O .9 ,2 0 2 0
ª2020 THE AUTHOR. PUBLISHED BY ELSEVIER ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN
COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY FO UNDATION. THIS IS AN OPEN ACCESS ARTICLE UNDER
THE CC BY-NC-ND LICENSE ( http://creativecommons.o rg/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).should it be that a few journals have preferred
quantity over quality, and we have been bombardedwith articles?
Scienti ﬁc journals, which have always been our
most important points of reference, have highly
regarded sources, but these publications are not al-
ways easy to access. Moreover, their websites can bedifﬁcult to understand, and these cannot be visual-
ized simultaneously. These are all characteristicsthat, in our busy lives, let social media win.