
HIDDEN VICTIMS OF COVID-19
I remember my shift at the beginning of the quaran-tine. It was the ﬁr s tt i m ei nm yw o r ke x p e r i e n c et h a tI
felt scared for myself because all the limited personalprotective equipment was gone, and I had no way todefend myself. Once again in this story, confusion
blocked an adequate and prompt reaction. However,
this time uncertainty was dictated not only by con-ﬂicting information, but also by the fact that we did
not really know what we were facing.
We all had to learn new skills, and COVID-19 created
unprecedented pressure on all doctors: attendingphysicians (consultants) serving as nurses; surgeonsresponsible for intravenous infusions; and junior
doctors dragged from their research positions to
perform 12-h shifts, with no clarity on how they wouldbe paid.
An important component for all of us as caregivers
was the emotional burden of COVID-19. I saw patientsin such bad shape or dying without access to me-chanical ventilation. It was beyond my own capacityas a doctor. Although you feel atrocious, you sud-
denly feel so helpless when confronted with the vi-
rus. But even more, when your colleagues are amongthe victims of the virus, it feels as though death iscoming inside your comfort zone, and you are throwninto great emotional distress.For many weeks, I would wake up every morning
thinking that the whole story was a nightmare —until I
realized that it was 1 more day of the world being on“mute. ”
Other hidden victims are those survivors who
will live with the complications of the deadly virus
for the rest of their lives. Another aspect that it isstill unknown is the percentage of patients dying incare homes. It seems that we still do not haveprecise data. Equally important are those personswho are afraid to go to the hospital because of thelockdown and who later present to the hospital withnearly fatal complications. The issue of complica-
tions related to mechanical ventilation is also being
discussed.
SECOND WAVE OF THE PANDEMIC
As the lockdown in certain countries is lifted and welook forward to catching a ﬂight and seeing friends,
family, and colleagues, we are not yet sure about the
effects of our actions or whether there will even be asecond or a third wave of the pandemic.
DO WE WISH TO LIVE IN FEAR?
O fc o u r s en o t ,b u ti ti si m p o r t a n tt os t a yv i g i l a n t —
about COVID mania, misinformation, the unknown
victims of COVID-19, and our future.
In conclusion, we are still ﬁghting an obscure en-
emy, but we are slowly starting to see the light at theend of the tunnel. Let us stay together, united andoptimistic.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr. Sara Mosca-
telli, Clinic of Cardiovascular Diseases, University ofGenoa, 6 Viale Benedetto XV, 16132 Genoa, Italy.E-mail: sara.moscatelli90@gmail.com . Twitter:
@saramoscatelli7 .
REFERENCE
1.First Epigraph: Henry Miller, Tropic of Capricorn
(Paris: The Obelisk Press-Seurat Editions, 1939; New
York: Grove Press, 1961), 170. Second Epigraph:
Henry Miller, Tropic of Capricorn, 5.KEY WORDS awareness, COVID-19, social
mediaMoscatelli JACC: CASE REPORTS, VOL. 2, NO. 9, 2020
Hidden Victims of the Pandemic JULY 15, 2020:1421 –21422