 The autoactivationof prothrombin induced by binding of histone H4 occurswell within the half-life of the zymogen in the blood butis too slow (up to 8 h) to be a potential catalyst ofmicrovascular thrombosis [16]. The interaction of histoneH4 with prothrombin probably produces other effects,
perhaps related to the mechanism of prothrombin activa-
tion by FXa. In order to promote autoactivation, bindingof histone H4 to the Gla domain of prothrombin [7] mustchange the reactivity of the sites of cleavage at R271 andR320 located nearly 80 /C23A away [3,17]. This long-range
communication is consistent with the conformationalplasticity of prothrombin that emerged from recent crys-tallographic and spectroscopic analysis [2,3,17] and may
also inﬂuence how the zymogen interacts with its physio-
logical activator FXa, free or assembled in the prothrom-binase complex. We therefore studied the kinetics ofprothrombin activation by FXa in the presence of histoneH4 and uncovered an unexpected dual effect of potentialpathophysiological signiﬁcance.
Methods
Recombinant full-length prothrombin (residues 1 –579)
was expressed and puriﬁed as previously described
[2,3,7,17]. Homogeneity and chemical identity of ﬁnalpreparations were veriﬁed by SDS –PAGE and by
RP-HPLC mass spectrometry analysis, giving a purity of>98%. Factor Xa and cofactor Va were purchased from
Hematologic Technologies (Essex Junction, VT, USA).Recombinant histone H4 was purchased from New Eng-land BioLabs (Ipswich, MA, USA). Activation of pro-
thrombin (0.1 mg mL
/C01, 1.4 lM) was carried out at room
temperature for 5 min as reported elsewhere [3,17] in thepresence of different concentrations (0 –10l
M) of histone
H4 under experimental conditions of 145 m MNaCl,
5m MCaCl 2,1 0m MTris, pH 7.4. The proteolytic reac-
tion was studied under three different conditions andstarted by addition of: (i) FXa (25 n
M); (ii) FXa (5 n M)
and phospholipids (25 lM); and (iii) FXa (10 p M), phos-
pholipids (25 lM) and cofactor Va (10 n M). Aliquots were
collected after 2 min and activation was followed at405 nm using chromogenic substrate H-D-Phe-Pro-Arg-p-nitroanilide hydrolysis. Small unilamellar vesicles com-posed of phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylserine in a3 : 1 molar ratio were prepared by extrusion using100 nm polycarbonate membranes and their size was con-ﬁrmed by dynamic light scattering. Alternatively, activa-
tion of prothrombin was followed by SDS-electrophoresis
under reducing conditions and started by: (i) FXa(40 n
M); (ii) FXa (20 n M) and phospholipids (25 lM); and
(iii) FXa (0.6 n M), phospholipids (25 lM) and cofactor Va
(10 n M). Prothrombin (0.1 mg mL/C01, 1.4 lM) was buffer
exchanged in 145 m MNaCl, 5 m MCaCl 2,1 0 m MTris,
pH 7.4, and incubated at 25 °C for 5 min in the absenceor presence of 3 lMhistone H4, dansylarginine-N-(3-
ethyl-1,5-pentanediyl) amide (60 lM), phospholipids and
cofactor Va as indicated. The reaction was started byaddition of FXa and quenched at different time intervalswith 10 lL of NuPAGE LDS buffer containing 10% b-
mercaptoethanol as reducing agent.
Results and discussion
Histone H4 signiﬁcantly promotes activation of pro-
thrombin by FXa, especially in the absence of phospho-lipids (Fig. 1A,D), but has a drastic inhibitory effect onthe same reaction when FXa is assembled in theprothrombinase complex with cofactor Va and phospho-lipids (Fig. 1G). This indicates that binding of histone H4makes prothrombin a better substrate for FXa, especiallyin the absence of phospholipids, but a very poor substrate
for the prothrombinase complex. Histone H4 also affects
the pathway of prothrombin activation. The effect is par-ticularly evident in the absence of phospholipids (Fig. 1B,C), where the consumption of prothrombin is acceleratedand a new band appears in SDS-PAGE to document anadditional cleavage at R155 to generate prethrombin-1before activation proceeds along the prethrombin-2 path-way. The reaction is minimally perturbed in the presence
of phospholipids (Fig. 1E,F) but progressively inhibited
in the presence of prothrombinase, where activationproceeds along the meizothrombin pathway (Fig. 1H,I).
The multifaceted effect of histone H4 on prothrombin
activation and autoactivation [7] strengthens the emergingrole of histones as double-edged swords in immunothrom-bosis [8,16]. During response to traumatic injury, sepsis,inﬂammation and cell necrosis the levels of histones,
RNA and polyamines become elevated in the blood
[9–14] and contribute to coagulation imbalance, inﬂam-
mation and multiple organ dysfunction [15]. The concen-tration of histones in the blood reaches 20 l
Munder
pathological conditions [18], which is a level sufﬁcient topromote autoactivation [7] and all the effects on activa-tion by FXa reported in this study (Fig. 1).