 Antithrombin, protein C, heparin cofac-tor II, plasminogen, and plasminogen activator inhibitorwere measured by chromogenic methods. Fibrinogenwas measured by the Clauss method (Clauss 1957). To-tal and free protein S, tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA), D-dimer (DD), tissue factor (TF), and von Wille-brand factor (vWF) were assayed by use of commerciallyavailable ELISA kits. Histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG)was measured by electroimmunoassay, tissue factorpathway inhibitor (TFPI) by a functional method (Sand-set et al. 1991), and homocysteine by a ¯uorimetricmethod (Hyland and Bottiglieri 1992). ABO bloodgroups and Factor V Leiden genotypes were assessed bymeans of standard techniques. Details of phenotype as-says are available in Souto et al. (2000).1454 Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67:1452±1459, 2000
Statistical Genetic Analysis
The heritability (the proportion of the total pheno-
typic variability attributable to genetic effects) of sus-ceptibility to thrombosis was evaluated by means of apedigree-based maximum-likelihood method that mod-els affection status as a threshold process (Duggirala etal. 1997, 1999 a; Williams et al. 1999 b). Although dis-
ease status is usually operationalized as a discrete trait,with individuals scored as unaffected or affected, it isgenerally assumed that there is an unobservable contin-uous trait, termed ªliabilityº or ªsusceptibility,º thatdetermines affection status. If an individual's liabilityscore exceeds some speci®ed threshold, disease results;if it is below the threshold, the individual is unaffected.The threshold is placed in an age- and sex-speci®c man-ner, to produce the appropriate population prevalence.A speci®c individual's liability is only known to be aboveor below the threshold, depending on the individual'saffection status, and an integral over the appropriateregion of the curve is used to estimate each person'sliability value. Since such continuous processes deter-mine most biological phenomena, it is useful to makeinferences on the underlying continuous scale, which ismore consistent with current models of gene action.Threshold models permit such inferences regarding thelatent underlying quantitative scale to be made. To usea threshold model, some weak assumptions regardingthe form of the underlying continuous process are nec-essary. For genetic modeling, we assume that the un-derlying liability distribution is normal, and we calculatethe joint probability of observing the disease statusesof family members by using a multivariate normal dis-tribution that allows for correlations among familymembers.
The analysis of heritability of thrombosis suscepti-
bility was performed using the variance componentmethod. The total phenotypic variance in thrombosissusceptibility was partitioned into three components: (1)an additive genetic variance, caused by the sum of theaverage effects of all the genes that in¯uence thrombosis;(2) a shared environmental variance, caused by the ef-fects of environmental factors that are common tohouseholds; and (3) a random environmental variancespeci®c to each individual. The random environmentalvariance also absorbs nonadditive genetic effects, suchas interactions between alleles within loci (dominanceeffects), interactions between alleles at different loci (ep-istatic effects), and effects caused by gene-environmentinteractions. Therefore, such models will generally un-derestimate the role of genetics in the determination ofthe trait.
With this approach, the relative components of var-
iance can be estimated by use of maximum-likelihoodestimation. Evaluation of the likelihood function for apedigree involves high dimensional integration of a mul-
tivariate normal distribution. The limits of integrationmay be different for each individual, depending on af-fection status as well as on any covariates that are in-troduced as ®xed effects in the model for the mean li-ability. In the current analyses, these covariates includedage and sex.
To study the genetic relationships between thrombosis
susceptibility and quantitative variation in hemostaticparameters, we used a new mixed discrete/continuoustrait variance component analysis (Williams et al.1999 b). This analysis used a modi®ed variance com-
ponent method to accommodate a mixture of discreteand continuous data and allows the phenotypic corre-lations between these traits to be decomposed into fac-tors caused by common genetic in¯uences and commonenvironmental in¯uences on the two traits. Examinationof the underlying determinants of phenotypic correla-tions provides information on the role of pleiotropicgenetic effects.
All the extant epidemiological evidence for the rela-
tionship between thrombosis and hemostatic parametersis based on the evaluation of phenotypic correlations.