Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67:1452±1459, 2000
1452Genetic Susceptibility to Thrombosis and Its Relationship
to Physiological Risk Factors: The GAIT Study
Juan Carlos Souto,1Laura Almasy,3Montserrat Borrell,1Francisco Blanco-Vaca,2JoseÂ Mateo,1
JoseÂ Manuel Soria,1Inma Coll,1Rosa Felices,1William Stone,3,4Jordi Fontcuberta,1and
John Blangero3
1Unitat de Trombosi i Hemostasia, Departament d'Hematologia, and2Servei de Bioquimica i Institut de Recerca, Hospital de la Santa Creu i
Sant Pau, Barcelona; and3Department of Genetics, Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research, and4Department of Biology, Trinity
University, San Antonio
Although there are a number of well-characterized genetic defects that lead to increased risk of thrombosis, little
information is available on the relative importance of genetic factors in thrombosis risk in the general population.We performed a family-based study of the genetics of thrombosis in the Spanish population to assess the heritabilityof thrombosis and to identify the joint actions of genes on thrombosis risk and related quantitative hemostasisphenotypes. We examined 398 individuals in 21 extended pedigrees. Twelve pedigrees were ascertained through aproband with idiopathic thrombosis, and the remaining pedigrees were randomly ascertained. The heritability ofthrombosis liability and the genetic correlations between thrombosis and each of the quantitative risk factors wereestimated by means of a novel variance component method that used a multivariate threshold model. More than60% of the variation in susceptibility to common thrombosis is attributable to genetic factors. Several quantitativerisk factors exhibited signi®cant genetic correlations with thrombosis, indicating that some of the genes that in¯uencequantitative variation in these physiological correlates also in¯uence the risk of thrombosis. Traits that exhibitedsigni®cant genetic correlations with thrombosis included levels of several coagulation factors (factors VII, VIII, IX,XI, XII, and von Willebrand), tissue plasminogen activator, homocysteine, and the activated protein C ratio. Thisis the ®rst study that quanti®es the genetic component of susceptibility to common thrombosis. The high heritabilityof thrombosis risk and the signi®cant genetic correlations between thrombosis and related risk factors suggest thatthe exploitation of correlated quantitative phenotypes will aid the search for susceptibility genes.
Introduction
Thrombosis is a common cause of morbidity and mor-
tality in industrialized nations. Both venous and arterialforms of thrombosis are of great public-health impor-tance. Although there is little direct information on prev-alence, retrospective and prospective data (Coon et al.1973; Anderson et al. 1991; Nordstrom et al. 1992)suggest a minimum lifetime prevalence of 5%±10% fordeep-vein thrombosis. After the inclusion of arterialthromboses, other venous thromboses, and undiagnosedthrombotic conditions, the true lifetime prevalence ofthrombosis must be substantially
110%.
The canonical causes of thrombosis include both en-
vironmental and genetic factors (Rosendaal 1999). Thehigh prevalence of thrombosis and its known environ-
Received August 14, 2000; accepted for publication October 9,
2000; electronically published October 19, 2000.
Address for correspondence and reprints: Dr. John Blangero, De-
partment of Genetics, Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research,P.O. Box 760549, San Antonio, TX 78245-0549 (express delivery:7620 NW Loop 410, San Antonio, TX). E-mail: john@darwin.sfbr.org
q2000 by The American Society of Human Genetics. All rights reserved.
0002-9297/2000/6706-0011$02.00mental in¯uences, such as smoking and oral contracep-
tive use, suggest that multiple genes of varying effectswill be involved in determining susceptibility to throm-bosis. Such complex oligogenic inheritance is also likelyto involve gene-gene and gene-environment interactions(Hasstedt et al. 1998). Although there are a number ofwell-characterized genetic defects that lead to increasedthrombotic risk (Lane et al. 1996), it is unlikely thatthese comparatively infrequent mutations constitute theprimary genetic in¯uences on risk of common late-onsetthrombosis. In fact, very little information is availableon the relative importance of genetic factors in throm-bosis risk in the general population. Because of the pau-city of family-based studies, there are no extant esti-mates of the heritability of thrombosis risk.
The physiological cascade that underlies the normal
formation of thrombin and the pathological endpointof thrombosis is complex, with many components in-volved in the coagulation and ®brinolytic pathways.The identi®cation of quantitative risk factors for throm-bosis has accelerated in recent years.