 Researchers in he-mostasis/thrombosis generally have not actively pursuedfamily studies, except for the occasional serendipitouscollection of unusual families with high densities of af-fected individuals. Therefore, most of our knowledgeregarding the genetic factors involved in common throm-bosis has been limited to association studies that usecase-control designs to look at known polymorphic var-
iations in candidate genes (Poort et al. 1996; Rosendaal1997; Rosendaal et al. 1997; Iacoviello et al. 1998).Although such studies provide important indirect evi-dence for the presence of genetic effects, they have anumber of weaknesses. These include their limitation toknown candidate genes, their propensity for type I errorscaused by hidden population strati®cation, the lack ofdirect evaluation of familial transmission, and their gen-eral inability to reliably estimate the relative importanceof genetic factors in determining within-population var-iation in thrombosis risk. Family-based studies eliminatethese problems, although their costs tend to be greater.
The high additive genetic heritability that we esti-
mated suggests that whole-genome approaches to lo-calizing and characterizing QTLs that underlie throm-bosis susceptibility will be feasible. The magnitude ofthe additive genetic heritability is greater than or equalto that seen in other common complex diseases such astype II diabetes (Duggirala et al. 1999 a), gallbladder
disease (Duggirala et al. 1999 b), alcoholism (Williams
et al. 1999 a), and obesity (Comuzzie et al. 1997), whose
contributing QTLs are currently being pursued throughgenome scans.
This is also the ®rst study that attempts to decompose
the phenotypic correlations between quantitative phys-iological risk factors and thrombosis into genetic andenvironmental components. Evidence for strong geneticcorrelations between FVIII, vWF, APCR, FIX, FXI,homocysteine, t-PA, and thrombosis indicate that thereare sets of genes that jointly in¯uence both disease riskand quantitative physiological variation. The detectionof genetic effects that act jointly on both quantitativerisk factors and disease liability is critically importantfor subsequent genetic analyses. When evidence of plei-otropy is detected, the correlational structure betweenthe quantitative phenotypes and risk of thrombosis canbe exploited to improve the power of joint linkage anal-Souto et al.: Genetics of Thrombosis: The GAIT Study 1457
yses to detect QTLs contributing to thrombotic risk (Al-
masy et al. 1997).
Most of our observed phenotypic correlations are
consistent with known epidemiological results. For ex-ample, there is previous evidence for a positive rela-tionship between both vWF and FVIII levels and riskof venous (Koster et al. 1995) and arterial thrombosis(Folsom et al. 1997). High plasma homocysteine levelshave been associated with deep-vein thrombosis (denHeijer et al. 1996) and with arterial thrombosis (Nygardet al. 1997). The quantitative measure of APCR is cor-related with risk of venous thrombosis, even when theFactor V Leiden polymorphism is taken into account(De Visser et al. 1999). Similarly, levels of FXII (Kohleret al. 1998) and t-PA (Ridker et al. 1993; Carter et al.1998) have been correlated with arterial thrombosis.Evidence regarding the association of FVII levels withthrombosis has been equivocal (Doggen et al. 1998;Iacoviello et al. 1998). Very recently, results from theLETS study have implicated high plasma levels of factorIX (Vlieg et al. 2000) and factor XI (Meijers et al. 2000)as risk factors for venous thrombosis.
The unique aspects of our correlational analyses lie
in the ability to disentangle genetic and environmentalsources of correlation. This technique allows us, for the®rst time, to conclude that most of the phenotypic cor-relations between thrombosis susceptibility and thequantitative physiological measures are due to pleiotro-pic effects of genes. There is little evidence that envi-ronmental effects induce much of the observed phe-notypic correlations. In the two cases where we didobserve signi®cant environmental correlations, theywere opposite in sign to the genetic correlations. Otherinvestigators have reported similar results from bivar-iate genetic analyses of a wide variety of traits (e.g.,Comuzzie et al. 1996; Brooks 2000; Mahaney et al.2000; Stern et al. 2000). One interpretation of the dif-ference in sign is that the genetic and environmentalsources of variation on these traits act through differentphysiological mechanisms.
In this study, we have chosen a broad de®nition of
thrombosis that includes both venous and arterialforms. Our justi®cation for this is both empirical andtheoretical. Pooling two genetically heterogeneous traitswould decrease the genetic signal-to-noise ratio of thecomposite trait.