 Numerous he-mostatic factorsÐincluding ®brinogen, factor VII, fac-tor VIII, von Willebrand factor, and homocysteineÐhave been implicated as possible concomitants of bothSouto et al.: Genetics of Thrombosis: The GAIT Study 1453
venous (Koster et al. 1994, 1995; MacCallum et al.
1995; den Heijer et al. 1996) and arterial thrombosis(Meade et al. 1986; Hamsten et al. 1987; Ernst andResch 1993; Ridker et al. 1993; Folsom et al. 1997;Nygard et al. 1997). Regardless of their causal rela-tionships with thrombosis, such correlated phenotypescan provide additional information about the geneticbasis of thrombosis risk. Recent advances in statisticalgenetics allow the simultaneous examination of the ge-netic and environmental sources of correlations betweensuch continuous physiological measures and discretedisease outcomes (Williams et al. 1999 b) through the
examination of data from large families. Such ap-proaches, when coupled with modern molecular genetictechnologies, will soon permit the localization and iden-ti®cation of the quantitative trait loci (QTLs) that un-derlie thrombosis risk. Prior to embarking on the po-tentially expensive search for the actual loci involved,it is prudent to evaluate the magnitude of genetic effectson thrombosis and to test for the pleiotropic effects ofgenes on both risk factors and disease.
As a ®rst step toward the ultimate goal of the iden-
ti®cation of novel genes involved in thrombosis suscep-tibility, we performed a family-based study of the ge-netics of thrombosis in the Spanish population. Thisstudy design has allowed us to quantify the heritabilityof thrombosis and to identify the joint actions of geneson thrombosis risk and a number of related quantitativephenotypes. Previous analyses of these 27 quantitativephenotypes have already demonstrated strong herita-bilities for most of these traits (Souto et al. 2000). Themajority of the heritabilities ranged between 0.22 and0.55, with somewhat higher values seen for factor XII(0.67), activated protein C resistance ratio (0.71), andactivated partial thromboplastin time (0.83), and some-what lower values observed for D-dimer (0.11) and tis-sue factor (0.17).
Subjects and Methods
Study Population and Diagnosis
The Genetic Analysis of Idiopathic Thrombophilia
(GAIT) Study is composed of 21 extended families, 12of which were ascertained through a proband withthrombophilia and 9 of which were obtained randomly.Thrombophilia was de®ned as multiple thromboticevents (at least one of which was spontaneous), a singlespontaneous episode of thrombosis with a ®rst-degreerelative also affected, or onset of thrombosis at age
!45
years. Ten of the 12 thrombophilic probands had onsetat age
!45 years, 8 had multiple episodes of thrombosis,
and 2 probands were ascertained on the basis of familyhistory. Diagnoses of the thrombophilic probands wereveri®ed by objective methods. Thrombosis in these in-dividuals was considered idiopathic because of exclusion
of all biological causes of thrombosis, including anti-thrombin de®ciency, Protein S and C de®ciencies, acti-vated protein C resistance, plasminogen de®ciency, hep-arin cofactor II de®ciency, Factor V Leiden, dys®bro-genemia, lupus anticoagulant, and antiphospholipid an-tibodies, known at the time of recruitment (1995±97).
A total of 398 individuals (with a mean of 19 indi-
viduals per family) were examined. Most pedigrees con-tained three generations, although eight families hadfour generations and one family had ®ve. Subjects hada mean age at examination of 37.7 years, and there wereapproximately equal numbers of males and females. Thecomposition of the families and the collection of lifestyle,medical, and family-history data have been describedelsewhere (Souto et al. 2000). Reported history ofthrombosis in family members was veri®ed by exami-nation of medical records, when available. Althoughsome deceased family members had a history of throm-bosis, only individuals interviewed and examined in per-son were included in the analyses. The primary residenceof each subject was also determined, to assess the con-tribution of shared environmental in¯uences (such asdiet) common to members of a household. The studywas performed according to the Declaration of Helsinkiof 1975, and all adult patients provided informed con-sent for themselves and for their minor children.
Laboratory Measurements and Techniques
A total of 27 quantitative phenotypes were measured
in the plasma of each individual. None of the partici-pants was being treated with anticoagulant therapy atthe time of blood drawing. Activated partial thrombo-plastin time (APTT), prothrombin time (PT), coagula-tion factors (FII, FV, FVII, FVIII, FIX, FX, FXI, andFXII), functional protein S, and the activated protein C-sensitivity ratio (APCR) were measured by automatedcoagulometry.