BRIEF REPORT
WEDGE: an anticoagulant thrombin mutant produced by
autoactivation
D. C. WOOD,* L. A. PELC,* N. POZZI,* M. WALLISCH, †N. G. VERBOUT, †E. I. TUCKER, †
A. GRUBER †and E . D I C E R A *
*Edward A. Doisy Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO; and
†Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA
To cite this article: Wood DC, Pelc LA, Pozzi N, Wallisch M, Verbout NG, Tucker EI, Gruber A, Di Cera E. WEDGE: an anticoagulant thrombin
mutant produced by autoactivation. J Thromb Haemost 2015; 13: 111 –4.
Summary. Background: The production of therapeutically
relevant proteases typically involves activation of azymogen precursor by external enzymes, which may raiseregulatory issues about availability and purity. Recentstudies of thrombin precursors have shown how toengineer constructs that spontaneously convert to themature protease by autoactivation, without the need for
external enzymes. Objectives: Autoactivation is an
innovative strategy that promises to simplify theproduction of proteases of therapeutic relevance, but hasnot been tested in practical applications. The aim of thisstudy was to provide a direct test of this strategy.Methods: An autoactivating version of the thrombin
mutant W215A/E217A (WE), which is currently inpreclinical development as an anticoagulant, was
engineered. Results and Conclusions: The autoactivating
version of WE can be produced in large quantities, likeWE made in BHK cells or Escherichia coli , and retains all
signiﬁcant functional properties in vitro andin vivo . The
results serve as proof of principle that autoactivation isan innovative and effective strategy for the production oftrypsin-like proteases of therapeutic relevance.
Keywords : anticoagulants; blood coagulation factors;
protein engineering; thrombin; zymogens.Introduction
The application of therapeutic proteases to diseases of
coagulation pathways is well documented [1]. In properlyregulated cellular pathways, proteases are synthesized asinactive precursors, which are then activated in response
to the metabolic state of the cell, and in response to
extracellular events, such as vascular injury [2]. Thisbiological strategy has been successfully applied forprotease production in recombinant organisms byoverexpression of proteases as inactive precursors,followed by an activation step. Among the ﬁrst proteinsmanufactured by recombinant engineering were proteasesof the coagulation cascade for hemophilia treatment [1].
Factor IX zymogen is overexpressed as a secretion
construct in Chinese hamster ovary cells, where activa-tion occurs by furin cleavage of the proenzyme [3]. Pro-duction of activated protein C was also accomplished bysuch a strategy, in which protein C zymogen is secretedinto recombinant mammalian cell culture medium andsubsequently activated by thrombin to the activeprotease [1].
The need for exogenous enzymes for the activation step
in the production of therapeutic proteases presents chal-lenges upon scale-up, including potential safety concernsassociated with proteins isolated from tissues or bloodproducts, maintenance of consistent quality and availabil-ity of the proteases, and increased cost of production. Analternative strategy for zymogen activation has emergedrecently from the structural biology of thrombin precur-
sors. Prethrombin-2 has Arg15 in the site of proteolytic
activation by prothrombinase or ecarin, in electrostaticinteraction with Glu14e, Asp14l and Glu18 [4]. Disrup-tion of these interactions by mutagenesis produces deriva-tives that spontaneously convert to thrombin, withoutappreciable perturbation of the functional properties ofthe enzyme [5]. The reaction is started by the zymogenitself, and is abrogated by inactivation of the catalytic
Ser195. This suggests a convenient strategy for the produc-
tion of protein therapeutics with desired pharmacodynamic
Correspondence: Enrico Di Cera, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, St
Louis, MO 63104, USA.
Tel.: +1 314 977 9201; fax: +1 314 977 9206.E-mail: enrico@slu.edu
Received 17 September 2014
Manuscript handled by: R. Camire
Final decision: P. H. Reitsma, 21 October 2014
©2014 International Society on Thrombosis and HaemostasisJournal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis ,13: 111–114 DOI: 10.1111/jth.12774properties that obviates the need for external enzymes
and associated potential regulatory hurdles.